Good afternoon and welcome to the Fiscal Year 2020 Third Quarter Financial Results Conference Call for Dell Technologies Inc. I’d like to inform all participants this call is being recorded at the request of Dell Technologies.
This broadcast is the copyrighted property of Dell Technologies Inc. Any rebroadcast of this information in whole or part without the prior written permission of Dell Technologies is prohibited. Following prepared remarks, we will conduct a question-and-answer session. [Operator Instructions]
I’d now like to turn to calling over to Robert Williams, Head of Investor Relations. Mr. Williams, you may begin.
Robert Williams
Thanks, Erica, and thanks everyone for joining us. With me today are Vice Chairman, Jeff Clarke; our CFO, Tom Sweet; and our Treasurer, Tyler Johnson.
During this call unless we indicate otherwise all references to financial measures refer to non-GAAP financial measures, including non-GAAP revenue, gross margin, operating expenses, operating income, net income, EPS, EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted free cash flow. A reconciliation of these measures to their most directly comparable GAAP measures can be found in our web deck and press release. Please also note that our growth percentages refer to a year-over-year change unless otherwise specified.
Finally, I’d like to remind you that all statements made during this call that relate to future results and events are forward-looking statements based on current expectations. Actual results and events could differ materially from those projected due to a number of risks and uncertainties which are discussed in our web deck and SEC reports. We assume no obligation to update our forward-looking statements.
Now, I’ll turn it over to Jeff.
Jeffrey Clarke
Thanks, Rob. At our September business update with investors I talked about our two focus areas. First innovating and integrating across Dell Technologies to create the technology infrastructure of the future and second innovating to win in the industry consolidation. We're making solid progress on both which is what I will update you on today plus I'll give you my take on the demand environment.
Customers are looking for to Dell Technologies to help them reinvent and automate all parts of their business essentially help them build the infrastructure of the future so they can quickly respond to market trends, customer needs and drive business outcomes. This drives long term value for our customers and for us.
It also drives us to innovate and invest in new technologies that are simpler, faster, and more capable even autonomous. All designed to be consumed the way customers want based on their business needs. We continue to invest in our Power portfolio across ISG which represents our best innovation and capabilities for the data era. We ship PowerMax with storage class memory and industry first-to-market and it's now 50% faster.
In September, we announced that PowerProtect DD Series that now features a modern software stack with 38% faster backups and 36% faster restores.
Most recently at our Dell Technology Summit earlier this month, we introduced our all-in-one autonomous infrastructure PowerOne. Part of the Dell Technologies cloud portfolio, PowerOne helps customers simplify their path to hybrid cloud combining PowerEdge Compute, PowerMax Storage, PowerSwitch networking, PowerProtect data protection and VMware virtualization all in a single system with intelligence built in to automate thousands of manual steps during its lifecycle.
Further, we made the industry’s broadest infrastructure portfolio simpler to consume with Dell Technologies on demand broadest infrastructure portfolio simpler to consume with Dell Technologies on-demand, letting customers pay for infrastructure as they use it, freeing up resources, money, time and people to focus on transforming their business in today's on-demand economy. This gives customers the ability to plan and predict around peak data consumption and IT spin cycles.
We are excited about what these new innovations make possible for our customers and what they represent in terms of how we've readied the ISG of the future or how we’ve readied ISG for the future over the past two years. We stabilized the business, reclaimed share, simplified and powered up the portfolio and added sales resources to fuel growth.
At the Dell Technology Summit, Michael unveiled our ambitious new goals for 2030 focusing on inclusion, sustainability, transforming lives through technology and data privacy. For example by 2030 our goal is that 100% of our packaging will be made from recycled or renewable material and more than half of our product content will be made from recycled and renewable material. And for every product a customer buys we will reuse or recycle an equivalent product.
These initiatives follow what we've achieved over the past 10 years like we recovering more than 2 billion pounds of used electronics via responsible recycling and reusing a 100 million pounds of recycled content and other sustainable materials in our new products. We have a strong record -- strong track record here to build on which helps us win in the marketplace.
We've made several important social impact commitments that are increasingly important to our customers, team members and investors. I encourage you to learn more on our website and through the replay of the summit event. Before I get to the demand environment I want to remind you of our operating framework that remains unchanged.
We expect to outperform the market and take profitable share. We have gained 375 basis points of storage share over the last two years, 580 basis points of mainstream server revenue share over the last three years and approximately 600 basis points of PC share over the last six years.
Now shifting to demand; from a customer set and geographic perspective, we see solid demand in small, medium and commercial accounts with weakness in China and some softening in the large enterprise space. From a business unit perspective, we see softness in inner – infrastructure solutions demand driven by servers while client solutions and VM are solid.
Let me share a few examples. Our storage business grew 7%. We saw a strong Q3 demand in data protection and hyper converged with VxRail orders up 82%. We expect to gain storage share in North America in calendar Q3, more importantly, our customers and sales teams are optimistic about our portfolio and positioning. The server demand environment remains challenged as many customers continue to digest last year's unprecedented growth.
Excluding Greater China, our Q3 server order revenue was down mid-to-high single digits. While the server market remained soft, we continue to focus on growing our server buyer base which was up 5% growing year-over-year for the fifth consecutive quarter. In addition, our server business benefited from increasing mix of high-value workload platforms, increase memory and storage content and component cost decreases.
We expect to gain share in North American and EMEA and retain our number one share positions in x86 mainstream server revenue in units. Client solutions demand remains healthy with tailwinds from the Windows 10 refresh cycle expected to continue and then fade into the first half of next year.
IDC is projecting a decline in post Windows 10 which will be a headwind to CSG in fiscal 2021 overall. In Q3 CSG delivered strong results across commercial. Going forward we remain focus on direct growth and optimizing our channel relationships. We have invested in our sales forces in both small and medium businesses and continue to accelerate growth there.
In consumer we will focus on direct sales and high-end premium PCs including XPS and gaming as well as increasing our attach of services, software and peripherals. We expect the component cost – we expect component cost to remain deflationary in aggregate through Q1 of next year. But it is significantly lower rate than the last three quarters.
We are now seeing inflation in SSDs with 20% and inflation expected in Q4 and DRAM inflation beginning in Q2 of 2020 per industry and analysts’ estimates. We clearly have captured the operating benefits from the significant cost declines in fiscal 2020 and it will be our job to mitigate these expected increases for our customers and for Dell in fiscal 2021.
And finally Intel CPU shortages have worsened quarter-over-quarter the shortages are now impacting our commercial PC and premium consumer PC Q4 forecasted shipments.
Now I will turn it over to Tom to take you through our financial results and guidance.
Thomas Sweet
Thanks, Jeff. We have executed relatively well this year and again in Q3 as we balance revenue and profitability with more challenging market conditions. Revenue was $22.9 billion up 1%, FX remained a headwind this quarter impacting growth by approximately 110 basis points.
Our deferred revenue balance increased to $25.9 billion up 17% driven by our services and software businesses adding revenue and cash flow stability. Gross margin was up 11% to $7.8 billion and it was 33.9% of revenue up 300 basis points driven by lower component cost and pricing discipline. Operating expenses were $5.3 billion, up 8% due in part to investments we have made in sales coverage to broaden solutions sales capabilities and expand buyer base.
Operating income was up 18% to $2.4 billion or 10.7% of revenue. Our consolidated net income was $1.4 billion, up 21% primarily benefiting from strong operating profitability. Our EPS was $1.75 for the quarter. Adjusted EBITDA was $2.9 billion or 12.5% of revenue and $11.6 billion on a trailing 12 month basis. We generated $1.6 billion of adjusted free cash flow in Q3 driven by strong profitability and working capital discipline.
Our Q3 adjusted free cash flow includes the impact of an approximately $400 million payment for tax settlement and our trailing 12 month adjusted free cash flow is now $7.7 billion. We repaid approximately $1.1 billion of gross debt in the quarter and $3.5 billion year-to-date. And we are positioned to repay approximately $5 billion of gross debt in total in fiscal year 2020. We have now paid down $18.1 billion of gross debt since the EMC merger.
Shifting to our business unit results, Infrastructure Solutions Group revenue was $8.4 billion, down 6%. Storage revenue was flat at $4.1 billion, up 7% with strong growth in data protection in our industry leading HCI business given our strong velocity with our VxRail solutions.
Servers and networking revenue was $4.2 billion, down 16% due to a soft market particularly in China and in large enterprise customers in the US and in Europe. As Jeff mentioned ex-China server order revenue was down mid to high single digits. We continue to be selective on larger deals when we see very aggressive competitive pricing. We are also focused on enhancing our coverage models and building sustainable long term customer relationships.
ISG operating income was $1 billion or 11.9% of revenue. Operating income percentage was up 140 basis points largely due to our business and geography mix. Our VMware business unit had another good quarter with revenue of $2.5 billion up 11%. Operating income was $717 million or 28.9% of revenue.
On a standalone basis Q3 VMware growth in revenue plus the sequential change in deferred revenue was 18% or an increase of 12% excluding unearned revenue assumed from the acquisition of Carbon Black. NSX license bookings grew 50% while the vSAN license bookings grew over 35%. VMware closed the Carbon Black acquisition in Q3 and expects to close the pivotal transaction before the end of Q4.
Client solutions group delivered strong Q3 revenue growth and profitability. Revenue was $11.4 billion, up 5%. Commercial revenue was $8.3 billion, up 9% including double-digit growth in commercial desktops and workstations. Consumer revenue was down $3.1 billion and it was down 6% as we continue to prioritize our commercial business in our focused on more profitable higher end consumer PCs.
CSG operating income was $739 million or 6.5% of revenue. Profitability was driven by component cost declines, commercial consumer mix and pricing discipline expect us to continue to balance revenue and profitability against market dynamics. As we have previously discussed, we are seeing and we do expect operating margins to turn back to more historical norms given the changing cost environment.
Dell Financial Services originations were $2 billion, up 27% with managed assets up $10.7 billion, and we continue to see interest in our flexible consumption solutions including Dell Technologies on demand.
Turning to our balance sheet and capital structure, we ended the quarter with $9.4 billion of cash and investments after a $1.1 billion of gross debt pay down in the approximately $400 million tax settlement payments. Our core debt balance ended the quarter at $35.9 billion, down almost $13 billion since the EMC acquisition. Net core debt ended Q3 at $29.6 billion.
We remain focused on maximizing free cash flow and our capital allocation strategy is unchanged. Given our recent debt pay down and refinancing activity we have only $2.3 billion of core debt due in the next 15 months and we will continue to look for additional opportunity to smooth our debt maturity profile and optimize our capital structure. We still expect to pay down at least $4 billion of gross debt next year and are committed to reducing leverage to achieve investment grade ratings.
Moving to guidance we continue to monitor the macroeconomic and IT spending environments as well as the ongoing trade discussions between the US and China. As Jeff mentioned earlier we do see continued softness in large enterprise customers and in China.
Based on Q3 result in the Intel CPU shortage Jeff mentioned we now expect fiscal 2020 GAAP revenue of $91.5 billion to $92.2 billion. Operating income of $2.9 billion to $3.1 billion with EPS of $5.83 to $5.98. We now expect our non-GAAP revenue range for the current fiscal year to be $91.8 billion to $92.5 billion. The reduction of the range is principally due to the Intel supply dynamic. With our strong profitability year-to-date driven by favorable component cost and disciplined pricing we are raising the low-end of our non-GAAP operating income and EPS guidance ranges.
Our non-GAAP operating income range is now $10 billion to $10.2 billion and our non-GAAP EPS guidance range is now $7.25 to $7.40. Our non-GAAP tax rate is expected to be 16% plus or minus 1%. Who want to give you some insights into our preliminary thinking for fiscal 2021.
We continue to see macro headwinds in China and softening client solutions demand post the Win 10 refresh. That coupled with the Intel’s CPU supply constraints in the global macro environment leads a slightly more cautious on fiscal 2021 growth. We also expect the benefit of the fiscal year 2020 component cost deflation to wane as component cost of forecast is to be inflationary in fiscal 2021.
And so, in a commodity deflation environment, which is what we've been in this year, we've been able to adjust street pricing or adjust pricing downward, but the rate of deflation has been greater than that was such that it has allowed us to capture some of that deflation in the form of incremental dollars to the bottom.
As you move to an environment of inflation that opportunity is not there and then you're trying to balance pricing versus demand generation and ensuring that you stay in price position, but yet protect the P&L as best you can. And so, what we've navigated through these cycles in the past, the model will adjust the model appropriate, but that's the dynamic we're working our way through.
We're thinking about as we think about next year right now. This will get – hopefully will continue to get more clarity on this going potentially second half cost frameworks of second half fiscal year 2021 as we go into FY 2021, but our view right now is that the cost environment becomes inflationary as you go through the year correct.
Jeffrey Clarke
And then your question specifically to PCs, Tony largely the commodity goodness in the first half of the year is already passed through in price. We've kept that product line in price position as well. It's largely we've seen most of the cost of goods have passed through. I do think we have to work our way through the supply shortages and that ultimately the market pricing will be but there isn't a bunch of cost being held back it is already pushed through the price.
Thomas Sweet
We have seen in areas where there are parking shortage that absolutely the pricing competitiveness or the pricing aggressiveness I should say size to some extent because you have a fixed amount of supply that you need to allocate the money in an appropriate way. So we'll just have to work our way through that as we go through the early parts of next year.
Operator
We'll take our next question from Rod Hall with Goldman Sachs.
Rod Hall
Yeah. Hi thanks for the question. I guess I wanted to start by asking whether the trade situation has driven any kind of inventory increases. I know it's probably dominated more by shortages of CPUs. But just wondering if you guys have seen any inventory changes particularly in the US but maybe in other parts of the world as well as potential tariffs approach?
And then I wanted to come back to this unit and pricing answer and just clarify whether that is inclusive of China. I guess it is and I wonder Jeff if you could maybe comment excluding China what happened to those prices and AUPs on servers? Thanks.
Thomas Sweet
The tariffs inventory were simple, our inventory levels have not changed. We continue to run this business on very low levels of inventory. And to your point that’s the shortages particularly there were specifically CPUs that are really driving our position of materials across our global supply chain not tariffs whatsoever.
In terms of unit price we don’t parse that out excluding China and certainly I won't do that today but it's the trend that I described or seeing again those trends actually oriented businesses respond to the price position in the marketplace as I mentioned our units were down as well not as down as much as the revenue. We did see increases in content of the DRAM and SSD as well as the CPU that I mentioned earlier.
And I think that bodes well longer-term as we think about content. We think about high value workloads and our ability to offset some of the change in the cost environment going forward. If you recall the front end of this last server build up we had commodity increases across the board.
Jeffrey Clarke
And by the way, it’s Jeff that was a server comment. That wasn’t…
Thomas Sweet
Yes.
Jeffrey Clarke
That wasn’t a PC comment, correct. And I would add Rod just on the – we have seen some elasticity in server – transaction volume, it’s particularly in the small and medium business that's responded well to the price position and price moves that Jeff and his team have done. It's just been a – we've had a – I would say a pretty significant headwind on large enterprise bids and then – particularly in that the China business given some of the geography macro dynamics over there.
We’ll take our next question from Aaron Rakers with Wells Fargo.
Aaron Rakers
Yeah. Thanks for taking the question, and I do have a product question as well. On the component side, you talked about with regard to the client PC business that SSD pricing would be up I think 20% sequentially in the calendar fourth quarter and a DRAM pricing would start to trend higher into 2Q of 2020.
Can you give us the same kind of framework or commentary of how you are seeing those trend specific to the server or enterprise SSD as well as a server DRAM market. You know how are you thinking about those dynamics as you kind of give the commentary with regard to fiscal 2021? And then any update on the mid-range next platform on the storage side, when is that expected to start to shift and impact the storage business? Thank you.
Jeffrey Clarke
Sure, Aaron. And real quickly, the NAND trends in DRAM trends that I mentioned were across all of our NAND purchases and DRAM purchases. So, industry analysts and experts have projected the costs that I referenced earlier. The 20% of SSD is now DRAM I believe I said Q2 of calendar 2020. That's across our broad purchase of both server components as well as PC components. And then in the mid-range, we're still on track.
So the commitment, I have made in the number of these calls that we will have the product completed by the end of the fiscal year and it will be released. We're pretty excited about that particularly with the momentum we've seen on Unity XT which is the bridge from the old Unity product. A performance increase of significant performance increase that we launched over the summer that take us to the new mid-range product out at the end of the fiscal year.
We like what we've done. Certainly we've talked a little bit about the feature set, it's a modern stack containerized capability at some modular design without getting into pre disclose and what the exact product is. We're excited about what it means. We have the right bridge strategy and we'll be able to help our customers migrate from the current technology to our new mid-range storage product.
Operator
We'll take our next question from Simon Leopold with Raymond James.
Simon Leopold
Thank you for taking the question. I wanted to see if we could double click on the dynamics of what's happening in China specifically set some context for us, how much of the business comes from China and then in terms of what's going on there how much do you attribute to their weaker economy and how much do you attribute to let's call it a political aspect of maybe not buying from Dell because you're a US company in which case, one is resolved by trade, the other dissolved by a – resolved by a better economy? Thank you.
Thomas Sweet
Hey, Simon, it's Tom. Let me just give you some context here, all right. So, from a size perspective, we've said this in the past that the China business unit is sort of high single-digits in terms of as a percent of revenue of the total company. So, you can do sort of rough math on that.
As we think about the demand environment in China and I'm not going to parse it for you whether what we – our belief is, as we’ve -- as we look at the businesses that there's a couple of dynamics happening. One there is an overall sort of macroeconomic softening that's happened in the country. We have seen that in elements of the China business.
We’ve seen that in elements of the China business it's hard and I'm not under any ability to sort of say some of that because of some of the more political dynamics I can't really call that. What we're trying to do right now is to ensure that we've got the China business properly framed such that when the Chinese economy comes back into growth mode or into a more a stronger mode that we can take advantage of the opportunities over there and continue to supply our customer needs over there. So look it's not a – it's a tough environment.

